What is an Environment Variable?

An environment variable is a key-value pair stored outside the source code that provides configuration or sensitive information to an application.

Example:

OPENAI_API_KEY = sk-...

Instead of writing the API key inside Python code, the program reads it from the environment when it starts.

Why use a .env file?

A .env file is a convenient way to store environment variables during local development.

Benefits:

Keeps secrets out of the source code.
Makes it easy to use different settings on different machines.
Prevents accidental exposure of API keys in Git repositories.
Allows configuration without modifying the application code.

In production, these values are usually supplied by the hosting platform rather than a .env file.

Why not hardcode secrets?

Hardcoding means writing sensitive values directly into the source code.

Example (not recommended):

OPENAI_API_KEY = "sk-xxxxxxxx"

Problems:

Anyone with access to the code can see the key.
Easy to accidentally commit to GitHub.
Difficult to rotate or replace keys.
Every environment (development, testing, production) would require editing the code.

Using environment variables separates configuration from implementation.

Which variables are secrets?

Secrets should never be committed to Git.

For Rune:

OpenAI API Key
PostgreSQL Password
GitHub Personal Access Token
Gmail OAuth Credentials
Google Calendar Credentials
Tavily API Key (if used)
Which variables are configuration?

Configuration values define how the application behaves but are not confidential.

Examples:

Chat Model
Embedding Model
Upload Directory
Cache Directory
Database Host
Database Port
Database Name

These could technically be committed, but keeping them in .env makes changing environments easier.

Which file loads which variables?
Variable	Loaded By	Purpose
OPENAI_API_KEY	openai_client.py	Authenticate with OpenAI
CHAT_MODEL	openai_client.py	Select chat model
EMBEDDING_MODEL	openai_client.py (or embedding service)	Select embedding model
DB_HOST, DB_PORT, DB_NAME, DB_USER, DB_PASSWORD	database.py	Connect to PostgreSQL
GITHUB_TOKEN	tools.py	GitHub API access
GMAIL_CREDENTIALS	tools.py	Gmail API access
GOOGLE_CALENDAR_CREDENTIALS	tools.py	Calendar API access
TAVILY_API_KEY	tools.py	Web search
UPLOAD_DIRECTORY	backend.py	Location for uploaded files
CACHE_DIRECTORY	backend.py	Temporary storage
Why make model names configurable?

Instead of writing:

model = "gpt-4.1"

inside the code, you store:

CHAT_MODEL=gpt-4.1

Advantages:

Switch models without modifying code.
Compare different models easily.
Use cheaper models during development.
Use stronger models in production.

The same principle applies to the embedding model.

Why are we storing EMBEDDING_MODEL if BGE is local?

Because configuration should describe what to use, not how it works.

Today:

EMBEDDING_MODEL=BAAI/bge-small-en-v1.5

Later, you could change it to:

EMBEDDING_MODEL=text-embedding-3-small

or another supported model, and the rest of your code can continue asking, "What embedding model should I use?" without being tied to a specific implementation.


llm_client.py

Responsible for:

Loading API keys
Loading model names
Initializing the LLM
Initializing the embedding model
Rate limiting requests
Retry logic
Token usage tracking
Returning the configured model to the rest of Rune

What is an LLM Client?

The LLM Client acts as the single interface between Rune and any language model.

Instead of allowing different parts of the application to create their own API clients, every request passes through this file.

Benefits:

Centralized configuration
Easier provider switching
Easier debugging
Easier rate limiting
Easier logging
Why have a separate LLM Client?

Imagine every file creates its own Groq client.

backend.py

↓

ChatGroq()

tools.py

↓

ChatGroq()

rag.py

↓

ChatGroq()

Now suppose you decide to switch to OpenAI.

You must edit every file.

Instead

backend

↓

LLM Client

↓

Groq

Later

backend

↓

LLM Client

↓

OpenAI

One file changes.

Everything else stays.

Why is the embedding model here?

Embeddings are produced by an AI model.

They are not part of PostgreSQL.

They are not part of RAG.

The embedding model is another machine learning model, so it belongs with the LLM configuration.

RAG simply uses it.

Why not create the LLM inside backend.py?

Because backend.py should focus on agent orchestration (LangGraph, memory, planner, routing).

If backend.py also manages API keys, model initialization, retries, and provider switching, it takes on too many responsibilities.

Separating the LLM client keeps the backend focused on how the agent thinks, while the LLM client focuses on how the agent communicates with language models.

Why use decorators?

A decorator allows additional behavior to be added to a function without modifying the function's implementation.

For Rune:

Backend

↓

invoke()

↓

@retry

↓

@rate_limit

↓

Groq

The backend only calls invoke(). It doesn't need to know anything about retries or waiting for rate limits.

Why rate limit if Groq already has limits?

There are three reasons:

Prevent hitting Groq's API limits during development.
Avoid accidental request bursts caused by loops or bugs.
Make migration to OpenAI seamless, since the same protection will already be be in place.
Why retry?

Network requests can fail temporarily because of:

transient network issues
server overload
temporary API errors

Automatically retrying a small number of times makes the assistant more robust without requiring the user to resend the request.